.\" man page for MakeArray
.de Ex
.sp
.RS
.nf
.ft C
..
.de Xe
.RE
.sp
.fi
..
.TH MakeArray 1 "11 February 2019" 


.SH NAME
MakeArray \- Suffix Array Implementation for GeneSeqer


.SH SYNOPSIS
.B MakeArray
[
.I dbest
]
.br


.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBMakeArray\fP is an implementation of the Manber and Myer suffix array
algorithm (Reference 1) for applications in conjunction with the
\fBGeneSeqer\fP program (Reference 2).
The distributed version is an implementation by Fred Goodman and George Juras
in collaboration with VisualMetrics Corporation (unpublished).


.PP
The \fBGeneSeqer\fP pacakge of program was developed in the group of Prof. V. Brendel
and is freely available under the GNU General Public Licence at
http://brendelgroup.org/bioinformatics2go/GeneSeqer.php/.
Correspondence relating to \fBMakeArray\fP/\fBGeneSeqer\fP should be addressed

.PP
.in +0.3i
.ll -0.3i
Volker Brendel
.br
Indiana University
.br
Department of Biology
.br
212 South Hawthorne Drive
.br
Simon Hall 205C
.br
Bloomington, IN 47405
.br
U.S.A.
.br
phone: (812) 855-7074
.br
email: vbrendel@indiana.edu
.ll +0.3i


.SH REFERENCES
.PP
.in +0.3i
1. Manber, U. & Myers, G. (1993)
.br
\fISuffix arrays: a new method for on-line search. \fP
.br
SIAM J. Comput. 22, 938-945.

.PP
.in +0.3i
.br
2. Usuka, J., Zhu, W. & Brendel, V. (2000)
.br
\fIOptimal spliced alignment of homologous cDNA to a genomic DNA template.\fP
.br
Bioinformatics 16, 203-211.


.SH USAGE
\&
.SH "Input file format"
.PP

\fIFASTA file format\fP
refers to raw sequence data separated by identifier lines of the form starting
with ">" followed by the sequence name.

Examples:
 
.Ex
>gi|sequence1 - upper case
ACGATTGGATCAAAATCCATGAAAGAGGGGAATCTATAGGCGGAATTGAG
CGCCAGCGACTGGCTGCCTTGGCGGGGGAGGCCTTGGCGGA

>SQ;sequence2 - upper case with numbering
       1  ACGATTGGAT CAAAATCCAT GAAAGAGGGG AATCTATAGG CGGAATTGAG
      51  CGCCAGCGAC TGGCTGCCTT GGCGGGGGAG GCCTTGGCGG A

>vb_sequence3 - lower case
acgattggatcaaaatccatgaaagaggggaatctataggcggaattgagcgccagcgac
tggctgccttggcgggggaggccttggcgga

>vb:sequence4 - mixed format
       1  ACGATTGGAT CAAAATCCAT GAAAGAGGGG AATCTATAGG GGGGGGATCT
cgccagcgac
        tggctgcct       tggcggggg       AGGCCTTGGCGGA
.Xe


.SH "Output"
.PP
Output to standard output gives statistics of the EST database, including
number of sequences, total length, minimum and maximum sequence length, and
length distribution.

In addition, the program produces four binary files that are read by the
\fBGeneSeqer\fP program (\fBGeneSeqer\fP option: \fB-dD\fP \fIdbest\fP):

.in +0.3i
.IP "\fI\ dbest.dat\fP"
Data file.
.IP "\fI\ dbest.ind\fP"
Index file.
.IP "\fI\ dbest.suf\fP"
Suffix Array file.
.IP "\fI\ dbest.tre\fP" 
Lcp Tree file.


.SH COMPILATION OPTIONS
.PP
The minimal allowed sequence length is set by

.br
#define MinSeqLen	x
.br

in GENESEQER/src/EstData.c (default value: x = 12).
.fi


.SH FILES
.PP
.nf
.ta 2.5i
GENESEQER/README
GENESEQER/bin
GENESEQER/data (examples)
GENESEQER/doc/MakeArray.1 (this file)
GENESEQER/include
GENESEQER/src
.fi


.SH SEE ALSO
GeneSeqer(1), SplicePredictor(1).


.SH NOTES
A hardcopy of this manual page is obtained by `man -t ./MakeArray.1 | lpr'.


.SH AUTHOR
Volker Brendel <vbrendel@vbrendel.edu>
