.\" man page for SplicePredictorLL
.de Ex
.sp
.RS
.nf
.ft C
..
.de Xe
.RE
.sp
.fi
..
.TH SplicePredictorLL 1 "11 February 2019" 


.SH NAME
SplicePredictorLL \- Splice Site Prediction with Logitlinear Models


.SH SYNOPSIS
.B SplicePredictorLL
[
.B \-m
.I model
]
[
.B \-s
.I species
]
.B \-c
.I cutoff
]
[
.B \-t
.I pval
]
[
.B \-T
.I sval
]
[
.B \-oO
]
[
.B \-n
.I topN
]
[
.B \-p
.I pstyle
]
[
.B \-w
.I [nsites sscwl]
]
[
.B \-x
]
[
.B \-eE
.I estdbn
]
[
.B \-i
.I prmfile
]
[
.B \-qQ
.I qpfname
]
[
.B \-I
.I matname
]
[
.B \-a
.I from
]
[
.B \-b
.I to
]
[
.B \-rR
]
[
.B \-lL
.I libname
]
[
.B \-g
.I gbfname(s)
]
.br


.SH DESCRIPTION
The basic version of \fISplicePredictorLL\fP implements logitlinear models for
splice site prediction trained on reliable sets of maize and \fIArabidopsis
thaliana\fP genomic sequences as described in Reference 1.
The predictions are based on the two variables of (i) degree of matching to
the splice site consensus and (ii) local compositional contrast.
The models assign a \fIP-value\fP between 0 and 1 to each potential splice site
such that true sites mostly score high and non-sites mostly score low.
The \fIP-value\fPs represent intrinsic splice site quality.
In otherwise constant context, sites with increased \fIP-value\fP are predicted
to result in more efficient splicing (see Reference 2).
Improvements to the basic model include the context-dependent scores \fIrho\fP
and \fIgamma\fP (Reference 3).
The \fIrho-value\fP of a given site is calculated as a weighted product of its
P-value times the P-value of its best potential intron-forming complementary
splice site; 0 < \fIrho\fP < 1.
The \fIgamma-value\fP of a site reflects how well this site fits in the locally
predicted splicing pattern.
If the given site is in a context that suggests preferred usage of nearby sites
as splicing partners to the exclusion of the given site, its \fIgamma-value\fP
will be zero.
Otherwise it will be a positive value less or equal to 2; high values of
\fIgamma\fP would strongly suggest actual usage of the site.

To quickly assess the overall quality of a site we implemented a * grading
system: the values of \fIP\fP, \fIrho\fP, and \fIgamma\fP are labeled 5*,
4*, 3*, or 2* if they match or exceed the threshold values for 90%, 80%,
65%, and 50% prediction specificity on the training set, 1* otherwise.
The sum of the \fI*-values\fP (attaining values between 3* and 15*) serves as a
simple combined measure.
For example, sites scoring 14* or 15* are highly reliable (estimated
specificity > 90%).

Minimal input to the program consists of a genomic sequence for which potential
splice sites are to be listed.
Optionally, the user may also supply cDNA/ESTs or "target proteins" which are
known or suspected to significantly match the genomic sequence or its
translation into encoded amino acids chains.
If supplied, the algorithm will return optimal \fIspliced alignments\fP which
"thread" the targets into the genomic DNA by scoring for splice sites and
sequence similarity in potential exons while allowing for introns as long gaps
in the alignment (References 4 and 5).


.PP
The \fBSplicePredictorLL\fP program was developed in the group of Prof. V. Brendel
and is freely available under the GNU General Public Licence at
http://brendelgroup.org/bioinformatics2go/SplicePredictor.php/.
Correspondence relating to \fBSplicePredictor\fP should be addressed to

.PP
.in +0.3i
.ll -0.3i
Volker Brendel
.br
Indiana University
.br
Department of Biology
.br
212 South Hawthorne Drive
.br
Simon Hall 205C
.br
Bloomington, IN 47405
.br
U.S.A.
.br
phone: (812) 855-7074
.br
email: vbrendel@indiana.edu
.ll +0.3i

.SH REFERENCES
.PP
.in +0.3i
.br
1. Kleffe, J., Hermann, K., Vahrson, W., Wittig, B. & Brendel, V. (1996)
.br
\fILogitlinear models for the prediction of splice sites in plant pre-mRNA
sequences.\fP
.br
Nucl. Acids Res. 24, 4709-4718.

.PP
.in +0.3i
.br
2. Brendel, V., Kleffe, J., Carle-Urioste, J.C. & Walbot, V. (1998)
.br
\fIPrediction of splice sites in plant pre-mRNA from sequence properties.\fP
.br
J. Mol. Biol. 276, 85-104.

.PP
.in +0.3i
.br
3. Brendel, V. & Kleffe, J. (1998)
.br
\fIPrediction of locally optimal splice sites in plant pre-mRNA with
applications to gene identification in Arabidopsis thaliana genomic
DNA.\fP
.br
Nucl. Acids Res. 26, 4748-4757.

.PP
.in +0.3i
.br
4. Usuka, J., Zhu, W. & Brendel, V. (2000)
.br
\fIOptimal spliced alignment of homologous cDNA to a genomic DNA template.\fP
.br
Bioinformatics 16, 203-211.

.PP
.in +0.3i
5. Usuka, J. & Brendel, V. (2000)
.br
\fIGene structure prediction by spliced alignment of genomic DNA with
protein sequences:  Increased accuracy by differential splice site scoring.\fP
.br
J. Mol. Biol. 297, 1075-1085.

.PP
.in +0.3i
.br
6. Brendel, V., Xing, L. & Zhu, W. (2004)
.br
\fIGene structure prediction from consensus spliced alignment of multiple
ESTs matching the same genomic locus.\fP
.br
Bioinformatics 20, 1157-1169.


.SH OPTIONS
.IP "\fB\-m\fP \fImodel\fP"
set model [0= without / 1= with (default) sub-classification]
.IP "\fB\-s\fP \fIspecies\fP"
Specify either "maize" [default] or "Arabidopsis" for splice site model to be
used.
.IP "\fB\-c\fP \fIcutoff\fP"
set prediction threshold level
              [0 = all GU (AG) sites with 50 base flanks
               1 = threshold at 100% sensitivity for training set [default]
               2 = threshold at  95% sensitivity for training set
               3 = threshold at maximal Tau value for training set
              ]
.IP "\fB\-t\fP \fIpval\fP"
set prediction threshold to \fIpval\fP [overrides -c option]
.IP "\fB\-T\fP \fIsval\fP"
set prediction threshold to \fIsval\fP [overrides -c option]
.IP "\fB\-oO\fP"
-o: order sites by P-value [default: by position]
-O: order sites by *-value [default: by position]
.IP "\fB\-n\fP \fItopN\fP"
display top N splice sites
.IP "\fB\-p\fP \fIpstyle\fP"
1 (terse=WWW); 2 (default); 3 (very terse=EXDOMINO); 4 (verbose);
5 (spreadsheet)
.IP "\fB\-w\fP [\fInsites sscwl\fP]"
report splice site clusters
(>= \fInsites\fP in <= \fIsscwl\fP bases; default: 4/1500, appropriate for
-T 14 option)
.IP "\fB\-x\fP [\fIfrom to\fP]"
LaTex graphical output in *.tex file(s)
.IP "\fB\-eE\fP \fIestdbn\fP"
Read EST sequence data from library file \fIestdbn\fP;
-e: align + strand only, -E: align + and - strands.
.IP "\fB\-i\fP \fIprmfile\fP"
Read parameters for EST matching from file \fIprmfile\fP.
.IP "\fB\-qQ\fP \fIqpfname\fP"
Read target protein sequence data from library (FASTA-format) file
\fIqpfname\fP.
.IP "\fB\-I\fP \fImatname\fP"
Read amino acid substitution scoring matrix from file \fImatname\fP.
.IP "\fB\-a\fP \fIfrom\fP"
Analyze genomic sequence from position \fIfrom\fP [default: 1].
.IP "\fB\-b\fP \fIto\fP"
Analyze genomic sequence up to position \fIto\fP [default: end of sequence].
.IP "\fB\-r\fP"
Analyze reverse strand.
.IP "\fB\-R\fP"
Analyze both strands.
.IP "\fB\-lL\fP \fIlibname\fP"
Read (multiple) sequence data from library file \fIlibfname\fP (FASTA-format).
.IP "\fB\-g\fP \fIgbfname(s)\fP"
Read nucleic acid sequence data from GenBank file(s) \fIgbfname(s)\fP.
If specified, the -g option must be last.


.SH USAGE
\&
.SH "Input file format"
.PP
\fBGenomic DNA input:\fP
Sequences should be in the one-letter-code
({a,b,c,d,g,h,i,k,m,n,q,r,s,t,u,v,w,y}),
upper or lower case; all other characters are ignored during input.
Multiple sequence input is accepted in \fIlibrary (FASTA) file format\fP
or in \fIGenBank format\fP.

\fILibrary (FASTA) file format\fP
refers to raw sequence data separated by identifier lines of the form starting
with ">" followed by the sequence name.
For options \fB-e\fP, \fB-E\fP, \fB-q\fP, and \fB-l\fP, the name of the
sequence is taken to be the first string on the ">" line delimited by space,
tab, |, or : starting from position 5.
For example, ">gi|idnumber|something-else" is given the name "idnumber".
For options \fB-Q\fP and \fB-L\fP, the name of the
sequence is taken to be the first string on the ">" line delimited by space,
tab, |, or : starting from position 2.
In the above example, the name would be "gi".
Typically, this option is appropriate for sequences supplied by the user in the
format ">my-sequence-name comments".

Examples (\fB-e\fP, \fB-E\fP, \fB-q\fP, and \fB-l\fP options):
 
.Ex
>gi|sequence1 - upper case
ACGATTGGATCAAAATCCATGAAAGAGGGGAATCTATAGGCGGAATTGAG
CGCCAGCGACTGGCTGCCTTGGCGGGGGAGGCCTTGGCGGA

>SQ;sequence2 - upper case with numbering
       1  ACGATTGGAT CAAAATCCAT GAAAGAGGGG AATCTATAGG CGGAATTGAG
      51  CGCCAGCGAC TGGCTGCCTT GGCGGGGGAG GCCTTGGCGG A

>vb:sequence3 - lower case
acgattggatcaaaatccatgaaagaggggaatctataggcggaattgagcgccagcgac
tggctgccttggcgggggaggccttggcgga

>vb:sequence4 - mixed format
       1  ACGATTGGAT CAAAATCCAT GAAAGAGGGG AATCTATAGG GGGGGGATCT
cgccagcgac
        tggctgcct       tggcggggg       AGGCCTTGGCGGA
.Xe

.PP
\fIGenBank format\fP
refers to raw sequence data with possible annotations as in standard GenBank
files.
Minimal requirements are the LOCUS and ORIGIN lines.
Multiple sequences must be separated by // lines.

.PP
\fBEST sequence input:\fP
EST sequences for spliced alignment may be supplied as a sequence file in
library format with the \fI-eE estdbn\fP options.  Spliced alignment will only
be performed for genomic DNA sequences of lengths not exceeding the parameter
MAXGLGTH (default: 13000).

.PP
\fBQuery protein input:\fP
Query protein sequences for spliced alignment may be supplied with the
\fI-qQ qpfname\fP option, where \fIqpfname\fP is a sequence file in library
format. Spliced alignment will only be performed for genomic DNA sequences of
lengths not exceeding the parameter MAXGLGTH (default: 13000).


.SH "Parameters"
.PP
There always is a trade-off between \fIsensitivity\fP ("How many true sites
will be correctly predicted?") versus \fIspecificity\fP ("How large is the
number of presumably false positive predictions?"). Four settings are optional:
"all GU and AG sites" prints out the donor and acceptor model scores at each GU
or AG, respectively, in the sequence; "100% learning set" (default) sets the
printing threshold at a level that includes all sites that were in our learning
sets; "95% learning set" sets the printing threshold at a level that includes
95% of the sites that were in our learning sets; "maximal tau" represents the
best compromise between sensitivity and specificity.



.SH "Output format"
.PP
Output is directed to standard output.

.PP
\fBPotential splice sites (example):\fP
.Ex
.in -2.0in
.ll +2.0in
\s-1
t    q      loc     sequence           P      rho   gamma   *  P*R*G*        parse
  .......
D --->    35713           ccgGTttgt   0.206  0.100  0.191  10 (3 4 3)  IAEEEEE-D-IIIAEED
D ->      35734           tctGTaatt   0.015  0.001  0.000   3 (1 1 1)  AEEEEED-I-IIAEEDI
D -->     35774           atgGTaact   0.223  0.001  0.000   6 (3 2 1)  IIAEEDI-I-IAEEDIA
D ->      35799           ttgGTgtgt   0.008  0.000  0.000   3 (1 1 1)  IAEEDII-I-AEEDIAE
A  <----  35819 ttattaattgcgtAGgt     0.618  0.112  0.538  13 (4 4 5)  AEEDIII-A-EEDIAED
D ->      35820           tagGTtcat   0.005  0.000  0.000   3 (1 1 1)  EEDIIIA-E-EDIAEDA
A     <-  35838 atttcctatacaaAGgg     0.062  0.001  0.000   3 (1 1 1)  EDIIIAE-E-DIAEDIA
D ->      35890           tatGTgatt   0.006  0.000  0.001   3 (1 1 1)  DIIIAEE-D-IAEDIAE
A     <-  35929 tgtgattccttcaAGtt     0.001  0.000  0.000   3 (1 1 1)  DIIAEED-I-AEDIAEE
A     <-  35959 gaatattatcctcAGtt     0.011  0.000  0.008   4 (1 1 2)  IIAEEDI-A-EDIAEEE
A     <-  36011 accccaaatttaaAGgt     0.003  0.000  0.000   3 (1 1 1)  IAEEDIA-E-DIAEEEE
D ----->  36012           aagGTacga   0.922  0.494  0.933  15 (5 5 5)  AEEDIAE-D-IAEEEEE
A     <-  36076 atatattccttgtAGgc     0.084  0.004  0.000   4 (1 2 1)  IADIAED-I-AEEEEED
A <-----  36100 tcgtgttcattgcAGat     0.816  0.345  0.732  15 (5 5 5)  ADIAEDI-A-EEEEEDI
A     <-  36122 tgttacctgagatAGta     0.003  0.000  0.000   3 (1 1 1)  DIAEDIA-E-EEEEDIA
A     <-  36125 tacctgagatagtAGaa     0.007  0.000  0.000   3 (1 1 1)  IAEDIAE-E-EEEDIIA
A     <-  36128 ctgagatagtagaAGct     0.003  0.000  0.000   3 (1 1 1)  AEDIAEE-E-EEDIIAE
A     <-  36148 tgtatcctttctgAGgt     0.001  0.000  0.000   3 (1 1 1)  ADIAEEE-E-EDIIAEE
A     <-  36166 gatgctgcgctaaAGgc     0.001  0.000  0.000   3 (1 1 1)  DIAEEEE-E-DIIAEEE
D ----->  36206           acgGTaatg   0.494  0.398  1.266  14 (4 5 5)  IAEEEEE-D-IIAEEED
D ->      36250           ttgGTattc   0.006  0.000  0.000   3 (1 1 1)  AEEEEED-I-IAEEEDI
A     <-  36271 tgagattatatcaAGag     0.002  0.000  0.000   3 (1 1 1)  IAEEEDI-I-AEEEDII
A <-----  36296 ataatttttctgcAGtc     0.805  0.371  0.778  15 (5 5 5)  AEEEDII-A-EEEDIIA
  .......
\s+1
.Xe
.in +2.0in
.ll -2.0in

.PP
Column \fIt\fP: type (D, donor, or A, acceptor)
.br
Column \fIq\fP: quality. The length of the arrow indicates the site quality
measured by the *-value:
.Ex
 ----- = *value 14-15 = highly likely (estimated specificity   >90%)
 ----  = *value 11-13 =    likely     (estimated specificity 60-70%)
 ---   = *value  8-10 =    possible   (estimated specificity 35-45%)
 --    = *value  5- 7 =    uncertain  (estimated specificity 10-20%)
 -     = *value  3- 4 =    doubtful   (estimated specificity   < 5%)
.Xe
The arrow head points into the predicted intron.

.PP
Column \fIloc\fP: site location (position of first or last base of potential
intron for D or A, respectively)
.br
Column \fIsequence\fP: site sequence
.br
Column \fIP\fP: P-value
.br
Column \fIrho\fP: rho-value
.br
Column \fIgamma\fP: gamma-value
.br
Column \fI*\fP: *-value
.br
Column \fIP*R*G*\fP: individual *-values for P, rho, and gamma
.br
Column \fIparse\fP (not shown): highest scoring assignment of the given site
and the seven adjacent sites upstream and downstream as either A (acceptor),
D (donor), E (exon), or I (intron)
.br
Note: Spliced alignment with ESTs confirms introns 35713-35819, 36012-36100,
and 36206-36296 (see file out.gbA.orig in the GeneSeqer/SplicePredictor
distribution data directory).

.PP
\fBSpliced alignment:\fP
For each significantly matching EST, the predicted gene structure based on an
optimal spliced alignment is displayed.
The upper line gives the genomic DNA and the lower line gives the EST
sequence.
Identities are indicated by vertical bars in the center line.
Introns are indicated by dots, gaps in the exons by '_'.
For protein spliced alignments, the alignment gives the genomic DNA sequence,
its inferred protein translation (one-letter-code), and the matching parts of
the target protein sequence.
Identical residues are linked by "|", positively scoring substitutions by
"+", and zero scoring substitutions by "." according to the
amino acid substitution scoring matrix used in the alignment.
Coordinates for the predicted exons and introns are given in the list
preceding the alignment.
Exons are assigned a normalized similarity score (1.000 represents 100%
identity).
For introns, the list gives the P-values of the donor and acceptor sites
(Reference 4) as well as a similarity score (s) based on the sequence
similarity in the adjacent 50 bases of exon.

.PP
\fISpecial lines\fP:
.br
MATCH gDNAx cDNAy scr lgth cvrg y
.PP
.in +0.3i
where gDNA = name of genomic DNA sequence; x = + (forward strand) or
- (reverse strand); cDNA = name of cDNA sequence; y = + (forward strand) or
- (reverse strand); scr = alignment score; lgth = cumulative length of scored
exons; cvrg = coverage of genomic DNA segment (y = G) or cDNA (y = C) or
target protein (y = P), whichever is highest
.br
\&
.in -0.3i
PGS_gDNAx_cDNAy (a  b,c  d, ...)
.br
or
.br
PGS_gDNAx_qp (a  b,c  d, ...)
.PP
.in +0.3i
where gDNA = name of genomic DNA sequence; x = + (forward strand) or
- (reverse strand); cDNA = name of cDNA sequence; y = + (forward strand) or
- (reverse strand); qp = name of target protein;
a, b, c, d, ... = exon coordinates.

.in -0.3i
The MATCH and PGS lines are useful for summarizing the search results for an
application involving multiple genomic DNA sequences and multiple ESTs or
target proteins (use a combination of 'egrep' and 'sort').  PGS = Predicted
Gene Structure (GenBank CDS-styled exon coordinates).


.SH NOTES
.PP
The related \fBGeneSeqer\fP program implements Bayesian models for splice site
prediction (Reference 6). The \fBSplicePredictor.c\fP source code includes
both the older logitlinear models (compiled by default as
\fBSplicePredictorLL\fP) and the recent Bayesian models (compiled by default
as \fBSplicePredictor\fP).  The current default \fBSplicePredictor\fP will be
fully supported and documented as soon as the manuscript is published.


.SH COMPILATION OPTIONS
.PP
The following parameters are set in the file
.br
\fIGENESEQER/include/sahmt.h\fP (change and re-compile depending on need and
available memory):
.br

.br
MAXGLGTH - maximum length of genomic DNA segment for spliced alignment;
default: 15000
.br
MAXCLGTH - maximum length of cDNA/EST for spliced alignment; default: 8000
.br
MAXPLGTH - maximum length of protein sequence for spliced alignment;
default: 3000
.fi

.SH FILES
.PP
.nf
.ta 2.5i
GENESEQER/README
GENESEQER/bin
GENESEQER/data (examples)
GENESEQER/doc/SplicePredictorLL.1 (this file)
GENESEQER/doc/SplicePredictor.1 (this file)
GENESEQER/include
GENESEQER/src
.fi

.SH SEE ALSO
GeneSeqer(1), SplicePredictor(1).

.SH NOTES
A hardcopy of this manual page is obtained by `man -t ./SplicePredictorLL.1 | lpr'.

.SH AUTHOR
Volker Brendel <vbrendel@indiana.edu>
