.\" man page for SplicePredictor
.de Ex
.sp
.RS
.nf
.ft C
..
.de Xe
.RE
.sp
.fi
..
.TH SplicePredictor 1 "15 February 2014" 


.SH NAME
SplicePredictor \- Splice Site Prediction with Bayesian Models


.SH SYNOPSIS
.B SplicePredictor
[
.B \-s
.I species
]
.B \-c
.I cutoff
]
[
.B \-t
.I pval
]
[
.B \-T
.I sval
]
[
.B \-oO
]
[
.B \-n
.I topN
]
[
.B \-u
]
[
.B \-U
]
[
.B \-p
.I pstyle
]
[
.B \-w
.I [nsites sscwl]
]
[
.B \-x
]
[
.B \-eE
.I estdbn
]
[
.B \-i
.I prmfile
]
[
.B \-qQ
.I qpfname
]
[
.B \-I
.I matname
]
[
.B \-a
.I from
]
[
.B \-b
.I to
]
[
.B \-rR
]
[
.B \-lL
.I libname
]
[
.B \-g
.I gbfname(s)
]
.br


.SH DESCRIPTION
The basic version of \fISplicePredictor\fP implements Bayesian models for
splice site prediction trained as described in References 1 and 2.
The predictions are implicitely based on the three variables of (i) degree of
matching to the splice site consensus, (ii) local compositional contrast, and
(iii) assessment of 3-base periodicity in coding regions.
The models assign a \fIP-value\fP between 0 and 1 to each potential splice site
such that true sites mostly score high and non-sites mostly score low.
The \fIP-value\fPs represent intrinsic splice site quality (see also Reference
3).
Refinements of the basic model include the context-dependent scores \fIrho\fP
and \fIgamma\fP (Reference 4).
The \fIrho-value\fP of a given site is calculated as a weighted product of its
P-value times the P-value of its best potential intron-forming complementary
splice site; 0 < \fIrho\fP < 1.
The \fIgamma-value\fP of a site reflects how well this site fits in the locally
predicted splicing pattern.
If the given site is in a context that suggests preferred usage of nearby sites
as splicing partners to the exclusion of the given site, its \fIgamma-value\fP
will be zero.
Otherwise it will be a positive value less or equal to 2; high values of
\fIgamma\fP would strongly suggest actual usage of the site.

To quickly assess the overall quality of a site we implemented a * grading
system: the values of \fIP\fP, \fIrho\fP, and \fIgamma\fP are labeled 5*,
4*, 3*, or 2* if they match or exceed the threshold values for 90%, 80%,
65%, and 50% prediction specificity on the training set, 1* otherwise.
The sum of the \fI*-values\fP (attaining values between 3* and 15*) serves as a
simple combined measure.
For example, sites scoring 14* or 15* are highly reliable (estimated
specificity > 90%).

Minimal input to the program consists of a genomic sequence for which potential
splice sites are to be listed.
Optionally, the user may also supply cDNA/ESTs or "target proteins" which are
known or suspected to significantly match the genomic sequence or its
translation into encoded amino acids chains.
If supplied, the algorithm will return optimal \fIspliced alignments\fP which
"thread" the targets into the genomic DNA by scoring for splice sites and
sequence similarity in potential exons while allowing for introns as long gaps
in the alignment (References 5 and 6).

.PP
The \fBSplicePredictor\fP program was developed in the group of Prof. V. Brendel
and is freely available under the GNU General Public Licence at
http://brendelgroup.org/bioinformatics2go/SplicePredictor.php/.
Correspondence relating to \fBSplicePredictor\fP should be addressed to

.PP
.in +0.3i
.ll -0.3i
Volker Brendel
.br
Indiana University
.br
Department of Biology
.br
212 South Hawthorne Drive
.br
Simon Hall 205C
.br
Bloomington, IN 47405
.br
U.S.A.
.br
phone: (812) 855-7074
.br
email: vbrendel@indiana.edu
.ll +0.3i


.SH REFERENCES
.PP
.in +0.3i
.br
1. Brendel, V., Xing, L. & Zhu, W. (2004)
.br
\fIGene structure prediction from consensus spliced alignment of multiple
ESTs matching the same genomic locus.\fP
.br
Bioinformatics 20, 1157-1169.

.PP
.in +0.3i
.br
2. Sparks, M.E. & Brendel, V. (2005)
.br
\fIIncorporation of splice site probability models for non-canonical introns
improves gene structure prediction in plants.\fP
.br
Bioinformatics 21 Suppl.3, iii1-iii11.

.PP
.in +0.3i
.br
3. Kleffe, J., Hermann, K., Vahrson, W., Wittig, B. & Brendel, V. (1996)
.br
\fILogitlinear models for the prediction of splice sites in plant pre-mRNA
sequences.\fP
.br
Nucl. Acids Res. 24, 4709-4718.

.PP
.in +0.3i
.br
4. Brendel, V. & Kleffe, J. (1998)
.br
\fIPrediction of locally optimal splice sites in plant pre-mRNA with
applications to gene identification in Arabidopsis thaliana genomic
DNA.\fP
.br
Nucl. Acids Res. 26, 4748-4757.

.PP
.in +0.3i
.br
5. Usuka, J., Zhu, W. & Brendel, V. (2000)
.br
\fIOptimal spliced alignment of homologous cDNA to a genomic DNA template.\fP
.br
Bioinformatics 16, 203-211.

.PP
.in +0.3i
6. Usuka, J. & Brendel, V. (2000)
.br
\fIGene structure prediction by spliced alignment of genomic DNA with
protein sequences:  Increased accuracy by differential splice site scoring.\fP
.br
J. Mol. Biol. 297, 1075-1085.



.SH OPTIONS
.IP "\fB\-s\fP \fIspecies\fP"
Set \fIspecies\fP to select the most appropriate splice site models.
This parameter must be specified.  Options: "human", "mouse", "rat", "chicken",
"Drosophila", "Daphnia", "nematode", "yeast", "Aspergillus", "Arabidopsis", "maize",
"rice", "Medicago", "generic".
.IP "\fB\-c\fP \fIcutoff\fP"
set prediction threshold level; only sites with critical value c = 2 ln BF at
least \fIcutoff\fP will be printed
.IP "\fB\-t\fP \fIpval\fP"
set prediction threshold to \fIpval\fP [overrides -c option]
.IP "\fB\-T\fP \fIsval\fP"
set prediction threshold to \fIsval\fP [overrides -c option]
.IP "\fB\-oO\fP"
-o: order sites by P-value [default: by position]
-O: order sites by *-value [default: by position]
.IP "\fB\-n\fP \fItopN\fP"
display top N splice sites
.IP "\fB\-u\fP"
disable local pruning of non-optimal sites
.IP "\fB\-U\fP"
score also non-canonical splice site dinucleotides
.IP "\fB\-p\fP \fIpstyle\fP"
1 (terse=WWW); 2 (default); 3 (very terse=EXDOMINO); 4 (verbose);
5 (spreadsheet)
.IP "\fB\-w\fP [\fInsites sscwl\fP]"
report splice site clusters
(>= \fInsites\fP in <= \fIsscwl\fP bases; default: 4/1500, appropriate for
-T 14 option)
.IP "\fB\-x\fP [\fIfrom to\fP]"
LaTex graphical output in *.tex file(s)
.IP "\fB\-eE\fP \fIestdbn\fP"
Read EST sequence data from library file \fIestdbn\fP;
-e: align + strand only, -E: align + and - strands.
.IP "\fB\-i\fP \fIprmfile\fP"
Read parameters for EST matching from file \fIprmfile\fP.
.IP "\fB\-qQ\fP \fIqpfname\fP"
Read target protein sequence data from library (FASTA-format) file
\fIqpfname\fP.
.IP "\fB\-I\fP \fImatname\fP"
Read amino acid substitution scoring matrix from file \fImatname\fP.
.IP "\fB\-a\fP \fIfrom\fP"
Analyze genomic sequence from position \fIfrom\fP [default: 1].
.IP "\fB\-b\fP \fIto\fP"
Analyze genomic sequence up to position \fIto\fP [default: end of sequence].
.IP "\fB\-r\fP"
Analyze reverse strand.
.IP "\fB\-R\fP"
Analyze both strands.
.IP "\fB\-lL\fP \fIlibname\fP"
Read (multiple) sequence data from library file \fIlibfname\fP (FASTA-format).
.IP "\fB\-g\fP \fIgbfname(s)\fP"
Read nucleic acid sequence data from GenBank file(s) \fIgbfname(s)\fP.
If specified, the -g option must be last.


.SH USAGE
\&
.SH "Input file format"
.PP
\fBGenomic DNA input:\fP
Sequences should be in the one-letter-code
({a,b,c,d,g,h,i,k,m,n,q,r,s,t,u,v,w,y}),
upper or lower case; all other characters are ignored during input.
Multiple sequence input is accepted in \fIlibrary (FASTA) file format\fP
or in \fIGenBank format\fP.

\fILibrary (FASTA) file format\fP
refers to raw sequence data separated by identifier lines of the form starting
with ">" followed by the sequence name.
For options \fB-e\fP, \fB-E\fP, \fB-q\fP, and \fB-l\fP, the name of the
sequence is taken to be the first string on the ">" line delimited by space,
tab, |, or : starting from position 5.
For example, ">gi|idnumber|something-else" is given the name "idnumber".
For options \fB-Q\fP and \fB-L\fP, the name of the
sequence is taken to be the first string on the ">" line delimited by space,
tab, |, or : starting from position 2.
In the above example, the name would be "gi".
Typically, this option is appropriate for sequences supplied by the user in the
format ">my-sequence-name comments".

Examples (\fB-e\fP, \fB-E\fP, \fB-q\fP, and \fB-l\fP options):
 
.Ex
>gi|sequence1 - upper case
ACGATTGGATCAAAATCCATGAAAGAGGGGAATCTATAGGCGGAATTGAG
CGCCAGCGACTGGCTGCCTTGGCGGGGGAGGCCTTGGCGGA

>SQ;sequence2 - upper case with numbering
       1  ACGATTGGAT CAAAATCCAT GAAAGAGGGG AATCTATAGG CGGAATTGAG
      51  CGCCAGCGAC TGGCTGCCTT GGCGGGGGAG GCCTTGGCGG A

>vb:sequence3 - lower case
acgattggatcaaaatccatgaaagaggggaatctataggcggaattgagcgccagcgac
tggctgccttggcgggggaggccttggcgga

>vb:sequence4 - mixed format
       1  ACGATTGGAT CAAAATCCAT GAAAGAGGGG AATCTATAGG GGGGGGATCT
cgccagcgac
        tggctgcct       tggcggggg       AGGCCTTGGCGGA
.Xe

.PP
\fIGenBank format\fP
refers to raw sequence data with possible annotations as in standard GenBank
files.
Minimal requirements are the LOCUS and ORIGIN lines.
Multiple sequences must be separated by // lines.

.PP
\fBEST sequence input:\fP
EST sequences for spliced alignment may be supplied as a sequence file in
library format with the \fI-eE estdbn\fP options.  Spliced alignment will only
be performed for genomic DNA sequences of lengths not exceeding the parameter
MAXGLGTH (default: 13000).

.PP
\fBQuery protein input:\fP
Query protein sequences for spliced alignment may be supplied with the
\fI-qQ qpfname\fP option, where \fIqpfname\fP is a sequence file in library
format. Spliced alignment will only be performed for genomic DNA sequences of
lengths not exceeding the parameter MAXGLGTH (default: 13000).


.SH "Parameters"
.PP
There always is a trade-off between \fIsensitivity\fP ("How many true sites
will be correctly predicted?") versus \fIspecificity\fP ("How large is the
number of presumably false positive predictions?").  For \fISplicePredictor\fP,
sensitivity and specificity are controlled by the critical value
\fIc = 2 ln BF\fP, where \fIBF\fP is the Bayes Factor (ratio of posterior to
prior oddds that a given site is a true splice site).  Higher values of \fIc\fP
increase specificity but decrease sensitivity (Reference 1).



.SH "Output format"
.PP
Output is directed to standard output.

.PP
\fBPotential splice sites (example):\fP
.Ex
.in -2.0in
.ll +2.0in
\s-1
t    q      loc     sequence           P       c      rho   gamma   *  P*R*G*        parse

  .......
D ---->   35713           ccgGTttgt   0.994  10.73   0.277  1.980  13 (5 3 5)  IADADIA-D-AEEDADA
A <-----  35819 ttattaattgcgtAGgt     0.986   9.04   0.487  1.963  14 (4 5 5)  ADADIAD-A-EEDADAD
D -->     35859           ctgGTtctg   0.793   3.26   0.000  0.000   5 (3 1 1)  DADIADA-E-EDADADA
D -->     35890           tatGTgatt   0.788   3.20   0.000  0.000   5 (3 1 1)  ADIADAE-E-DADADAE
D --->    36012           aagGTacga   0.978   8.13   0.268  0.185  10 (5 3 2)  DIADAEE-D-ADADAED
A <-----  36100 tcgtgttcattgcAGat     0.996  11.54   0.497  1.973  15 (5 5 5)  IADAEED-A-DADAEDA
D ----->  36206           acgGTaatg   0.995  11.24   0.985  1.985  15 (5 5 5)  ADAEEDA-D-ADAEDAD
A <-----  36296 ataatttttctgcAGtc     0.990   9.67   0.985  1.985  14 (4 5 5)  DAEEDAD-A-DAEDAED
D ----->  36432           cagGTatgg   0.997  12.20   0.335  1.987  14 (5 4 5)  AEEDADA-D-AEDAEDA
A   <---  36520 acattgcgataacAGgc     1.000  17.83   0.336  0.015  10 (5 3 2)  EEDADAD-A-EDAEDIA
A    <--  36721 ttcgaatctgatcAGgt     0.985   8.97   0.000  0.000   6 (4 1 1)  EDADADA-E-DAEDIAD
D ----->  36722           cagGTgagt   0.955   6.68   0.939  1.939  15 (5 5 5)  DADADAE-D-AEDIADA
A <-----  36815 ggatgaatgaaacAGga     0.984   8.78   0.488  1.883  14 (4 5 5)  ADADAED-A-EDIADAE
  .......
\s+1
.Xe
.in +2.0in
.ll -2.0in

.PP
Column \fIt\fP: type (D, donor, or A, acceptor)
.br
Column \fIq\fP: quality. The length of the arrow indicates the site quality
measured by the *-value:
.Ex
 ----- = *value 14-15 = highly likely (estimated specificity   >90%)
 ----  = *value 11-13 =    likely     (estimated specificity 60-70%)
 ---   = *value  8-10 =    possible   (estimated specificity 35-45%)
 --    = *value  5- 7 =    uncertain  (estimated specificity 10-20%)
 -     = *value  3- 4 =    doubtful   (estimated specificity   < 5%)
.Xe
The arrow head points into the predicted intron.

.PP
Column \fIloc\fP: site location (position of first or last base of potential
intron for D or A, respectively)
.br
Column \fIsequence\fP: site sequence
.br
Column \fIP\fP: P-value
.br
Column \fIc\fP: cutoff c = 2 ln (BF)
.br
Column \fIrho\fP: rho-value
.br
Column \fIgamma\fP: gamma-value
.br
Column \fI*\fP: *-value
.br
Column \fIP*R*G*\fP: individual *-values for P, rho, and gamma
.br
Column \fIparse\fP: highest scoring assignment of the given site
and the seven adjacent sites upstream and downstream as either A (acceptor),
D (donor), E (exon), or I (intron)
.br
Note: Spliced alignment with ESTs confirms introns 35713-35819, 36012-36100,
36206-36296, 36342-36520, and 36722-36815 (see file out.gbA.orig in the
GeneSeqer/SplicePredictor distribution data directory).

.PP
\fBSpliced alignment:\fP
For each significantly matching EST, the predicted gene structure based on an
optimal spliced alignment is displayed.
The upper line gives the genomic DNA and the lower line gives the EST sequence.
Identities are indicated by vertical bars in the center line.
Introns are indicated by dots, gaps in the exons by '_'.
For protein spliced alignments, the alignment gives the genomic DNA sequence,
its inferred protein translation (one-letter-code), and the matching parts of
the target protein sequence.
Identical residues are linked by "|", positively scoring substitutions by "+",
and zero scoring substitutions by "." according to the amino acid substitution
scoring matrix used in the alignment.
Coordinates for the predicted exons and introns are given in the list preceding
the alignment.
Exons are assigned a normalized similarity score (1.000 represents 100%
identity).
For introns, the list gives adjusted P-values of the donor and acceptor sites
(2 * (P - 0.5) for P > 0.5) as well as a similarity score (s) based on the
sequence similarity in the adjacent 50 bases of exon.

.PP
\fISpecial lines\fP:
.br
MATCH gDNAx cDNAy scr lgth cvrg y
.PP
.in +0.3i
where gDNA = name of genomic DNA sequence; x = + (forward strand) or
- (reverse strand); cDNA = name of cDNA sequence; y = + (forward strand) or
- (reverse strand); scr = alignment score; lgth = cumulative length of scored
exons; cvrg = coverage of genomic DNA segment (y = G) or cDNA (y = C) or
target protein (y = P), whichever is highest
.br
\&
.in -0.3i
PGS_gDNAx_cDNAy (a  b,c  d, ...)
.br
or
.br
PGS_gDNAx_qp (a  b,c  d, ...)
.PP
.in +0.3i
where gDNA = name of genomic DNA sequence; x = + (forward strand) or
- (reverse strand); cDNA = name of cDNA sequence; y = + (forward strand) or
- (reverse strand); qp = name of target protein;
a, b, c, d, ... = exon coordinates.

.in -0.3i
The MATCH and PGS lines are useful for summarizing the search results for an
application involving multiple genomic DNA sequences and multiple ESTs or
target proteins (use a combination of 'egrep' and 'sort').  PGS = Predicted
Gene Structure (GenBank CDS-styled exon coordinates).


.SH NOTES
.PP
The \fBSplicePredictor.c\fP source code includes also the older logitlinear
models for maize and \fIArabidopsis thaliana\fP (Reference 3), compiled by
default as \fBSplicePredictorLL\fP.


.SH COMPILATION OPTIONS
.PP
The following parameters are set in the file
.br
\fIGENESEQER/include/sahmt.h\fP (change and re-compile depending on need and
available memory):
.br

.br
MAXGLGTH - maximum length of genomic DNA segment for spliced alignment;
default: 15000
.br
MAXCLGTH - maximum length of cDNA/EST for spliced alignment; default: 8000
.br
MAXPLGTH - maximum length of protein sequence for spliced alignment;
default: 3000
.fi

.SH FILES
.PP
.nf
.ta 2.5i
GENESEQER/README
GENESEQER/bin
GENESEQER/data (examples)
GENESEQER/doc/SplicePredictor.1 (this file)
GENESEQER/doc/SplicePredictor.1 (this file)
GENESEQER/include
GENESEQER/src
.fi

.SH SEE ALSO
GeneSeqer(1), SplicePredictorLL(1).

.SH NOTES
A hardcopy of this manual page is obtained by `man -t ./SplicePredictor.1 | lpr'.

.SH AUTHOR
Volker Brendel <vbrendel@indiana.edu>
